Addition of Consul Envoy Extensions ExtProc documentation (#2929)
hashicorp/web-unified-docs: content/consul/v2.0.x/content/docs/envoy-extension/ext-proc.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Delegate request and response processing to an external service
description: Learn how to use the `ext-proc` Envoy extension to send data plane requests and responses to an external processing service for API gateways and sidecar proxies on virtual machines and Kubernetes.
# START AUTO GENERATED METADATA, DO NOT EDIT
created_at: 2026-07-13T00:00:00.000Z
last_modified: 2026-07-13T00:00:00.000Z
# END AUTO GENERATED METADATA
---

# Delegate request and response processing to an external service

<EnterpriseAlert>
This feature requires self-managed Consul Enterprise.

> </EnterpriseAlert>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@include 'alerts/enterprise-alert.mdx'
```

Use stsandard enterprise banner.

Reviewer 2: Also, the Enterprise Alert should be at the end of the intro section so the Enterprise warning text is not included in search results.

Author: Done

---
layout: docs

> page_title: Delegate request and response processing to an external service

Reviewer: External services is a terminology we used until now to refer to services not running in the datacenter for which we should use `consul-esm` and terminating gateways.

This does not seem related to that, right?

If so, we should put something in the introduction to differentiate the two interpretations of the same term.

Author: @danielehc Is `Intercept and process HTTP traffic with the ext-proc Envoy extension` better ?

description: Learn how to use the `ext-proc` Envoy extension to send data plane requests and responses to an external processing service for API gateways and sidecar proxies on virtual machines and Kubernetes.
# START AUTO GENERATED METADATA, DO NOT EDIT
created_at: 2026-07-13T00:00:00.000Z
last_modified: 2026-07-13T00:00:00.000Z
# END AUTO GENERATED METADATA
---

# Delegate request and response processing to an external service

@include 'alerts/enterprise-alert.mdx'

> This topic describes how to use the external processing Envoy extension to send data plane requests and responses to an external processing service. The processing service can inspect and mutate headers, bodies, and trailers, which lets you implement custom logic such as dynamic routing, header enrichment, and request transformation. You do not need to modify your applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This topic describes how to use the external processing Envoy extension to send data plane requests and responses to an external processing service. The processing service can inspect and mutate headers, bodies, and trailers, which lets you implement custom logic such as dynamic routing, header enrichment, and request transformation without the need to modify your applications.
```

Author: Done

> 
> You can apply the extension to the inbound listener of a Consul API gateway or to the inbound or outbound listener of a sidecar proxy. This workflow applies to both virtual machine (VM) and Kubernetes deployments.
> ## Workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can apply the extension to the inbound listener of a Consul API gateway or to the inbound or outbound listener of a sidecar proxy. This workflow applies to both virtual machine (VM) and Kubernetes deployments.

## Workflow
```

Author: Done

1. Apply the configuration entry.
1. On Kubernetes, optionally attach a `RouteExtProc` resource to an `HTTPRoute` to control external processing for specific routes.

## Requirements

- Consul Enterprise v2.0.0 or later.
- The target proxy must use an HTTP-based protocol. Set the `Protocol` field to `http`, `http2`, or `grpc` in the service defaults configuration entry for the service or gateway.
- The external processing service must implement the [Envoy external processing API](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/extensions/filters/http/ext_proc/v3/ext_proc.proto).
- When you target a mesh service, you must create a [service intention](/consul/docs/reference/config-entry/service-intentions) that allows the proxy to reach the processing service.

## Add the `EnvoyExtensions`

Add Envoy extension configurations to a proxy defaults or service defaults configuration entry. Place the extension configuration in an `EnvoyExtensions` block in the configuration entry.

- When you configure Envoy extensions on proxy defaults, they apply to every service.
- When you configure Envoy extensions on service defaults, they apply to a specific service or gateway.

> Consul applies Envoy extensions configured in proxy defaults before it applies extensions in service defaults. As a result, the Envoy extension configuration in service defaults may override configurations in proxy defaults.

Reviewer: You say:

> configuration in service defaults may override configurations in proxy defaults.

I think instead of **may** we should use **will**. Or is there some condition where the configuration override will not happen.

Author: @danielehc This is the standard message across all envoy extension pages. Do I need to change it everywhere ?

Reviewer: @pajay-rao  I know we use this message in other pages but maybe it is something that we want to address. 

My comment was about it being a bit vague and was trying to understand if there is a way to put this giving more context or a clearer expected result.

I do not think we need to change all of them now, we can start with this PR and then address the others in a separate moment.

What do you think?

Author: I have removed unintended consequences and specified what is the issue and expectation. Hope that works.

        }
      }
    }
  }]
}
```

</CodeBlockConfig>
<CodeBlockConfig filename="service-e1-ext-proc-service-defaults.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: consul.hashicorp.com/v1alpha1
kind: ServiceDefaults
metadata:
  name: service-e1
spec:
  protocol: http
  envoyExtensions:
    - name: builtin/ext-proc
      required: true
      arguments:
        proxyType: connect-proxy
        listenerType: inbound
        config:
          routeCacheAction: CLEAR
          httpService:
            target:
              uri: "127.0.0.1:9000"
            path: /decide
```

</CodeBlockConfig>
</CodeTabs>

Refer to the [external processing extension configuration reference](/consul/docs/reference/proxy/extensions/ext-proc) for configuration details.

Refer to the [proxy defaults configuration entry reference](/consul/docs/reference/config-entry/proxy-defaults) and [service defaults configuration entry reference](/consul/docs/reference/config-entry/service-defaults) for configuration entry details.

<Warning>

Adding Envoy extensions to default proxy configurations may have unintended consequences. We recommend configuring `EnvoyExtensions` in service defaults configuration entries in most cases.

> </Warning>

Reviewer: I think this should also be mentioned in the [## Add the `EnvoyExtensions`](https://github.com/hashicorp/web-unified-docs/pull/2929/changes#diff-e0e20e23bae043c1a19db611b841c019f0b19e1dedfc0af5b18502d5b3cb0524R34) H2. 

This could also be used to justify ehy we provide examples only for `service-defaults` and to refer them to the `proxy-defaults` reference in case they wanna try their luck.

Also "unintended consequences" is not very clear, what is the worst thing it could happen?

Author: @danielehc This is the standard message across all envoy extension pages. Do I need to change it everywhere ?

Reviewer: @pajay-rao same as the comment above.

I do not think we should go and change it everywhere but I think we should be less undefined on these unintended consequences.

Author: I have removed unintended consequences and specified what is the issue and expectation

### Configure multiple instances

> You can attach more than one `ext-proc` extension to the same proxy. When you do, set a unique `StatPrefix` for each instance. Consul uses the prefix to derive a unique Envoy filter name in the form `envoy.filters.http.ext_proc/<StatPrefix>`. When you omit the prefix, Consul uses the unsuffixed filter name `envoy.filters.http.ext_proc`, which you can use for a single always-on instance.

Reviewer: It is not really clear how Consul will filter across the different configurations.

The only clear example I could think of is having one `inbound` and one `outbound` configuration so to have multiple different processing steps for input received by the application or requests sent by the applications.

Are there other use-cases? If so how does Consul filters between two different requests that require different procesing?

Also, once identified a proper use case it might be useful to have a configuration example for it in this section.

Author: @danielehc I have added more exmaples

        listenerType: inbound
        config:
          statPrefix: auth-check
          grpcService:
            target:
              service:
                name: auth-processor
    - name: builtin/ext-proc
      arguments:
        proxyType: api-gateway
        listenerType: inbound
        config:
          statPrefix: header-enrichment
          grpcService:
            target:
              service:
                name: enrichment-processor
```

</CodeBlockConfig>
</CodeTabs>

## Apply the configuration entry

For VM deployments, run the `consul config write` command and specify the proxy defaults or service defaults configuration entry. For Kubernetes deployments, run `kubectl apply`. The following example applies the extension in a service defaults configuration entry.

<CodeTabs tabs={[ "HCL", "JSON", "YAML" ]}>

```shell-session
$ consul config write api-gateway-ext-proc-service-defaults.hcl
```

```shell-session
$ consul config write api-gateway-ext-proc-service-defaults.json
```

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply -f api-gateway-ext-proc-service-defaults.yaml
```

</CodeTabs>

## Control external processing for individual routes on Kubernetes

> On Kubernetes, you can control external processing for individual API gateway routes with the `RouteExtProc` custom resource. Attach the resource to an `HTTPRoute` with an `ExtensionRef` filter to disable or override the behavior of a targeted `ext-proc` instance for requests that match the route.

Reviewer: @pajay-rao I was looking for the reference for `RouteExtProc` and could not find it.

Do we need to add it in this PR?

Author: Thanks for pointing out the miss. I have added new reference for RouteExtProc content/consul/v2.0.x/content/docs/reference/k8s/api-gateway/routeextprocfilter.mdx

kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: static-route
  namespace: default
spec:
  parentRefs:
    - name: api-gateway
  rules:
    - matches:
        - path:
            type: PathPrefix
            value: /static
      filters:
        - type: ExtensionRef
          extensionRef:
            group: consul.hashicorp.com
            kind: RouteExtProc
            name: disable-route-decider
      backendRefs:
        - kind: Service
          name: service-a
          namespace: default
          port: 8080
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

The following example uses `override` mode to keep the instance enabled on the route while sending request headers and the buffered request body to the processing service:

<CodeBlockConfig filename="override-route-decider.yaml">

```yaml
apiVersion: consul.hashicorp.com/v1alpha1
kind: RouteExtProc
metadata:
  name: override-route-decider
  namespace: default
spec:
  statPrefix: route-decider
  mode: override
  overrides:
    processing:
      request:
        headersMode: SEND
        bodyMode: BUFFERED
```

</CodeBlockConfig>

Run the following command to apply the resources:

```shell-session
$ kubectl apply -f disable-route-decider.yaml
```

> 

Reviewer: We should add links to `HTTPRoute` and `RouteExtProc` (when created) references.

I think that either here or in the `Next steps` section is fine.

Author: I have added Refer to the section below for ext-proc and http route
